docs/ARCHITECTURE.md, before:

# Architecture: Mascord Discord Bot

## System Overview

Mascord is designed as a modular Discord bot focusing on local resource efficiency and clean separation of concerns.

## Components

### 1. Bot Framework (Poise/Serenity)

- **Responsibility**: Discord API interaction, gateway management, command dispatching.
- **Interface**: Uses `poise::Framework` for command routing. Unified `/chat` command for all interactions.
- **Dependencies**: Discord Gateway.

### 2. Audio Service (Songbird)

- **Responsibility**: Voice channel state management, audio streaming, queue handling.
- **Compute**: Low (audio decoding via Opus).
- **Interface**: `src/voice/player.rs`.
- **Dependencies**: `yt-dlp`, `ffmpeg`, optional `YOUTUBE_COOKIES`.

### 3. LLM Client (async-openai)

- **Responsibility**: Communicating with an LLM provider.
- **Support**: Works with *any* OpenAI-compatible API (e.g., `llama.cpp`, LocalAI, vLLM, Groq, or OpenAI).
- **Interface**: `src/llm/client.rs`.
- **Dependencies**: Configurable `LLAMA_URL` and optional `LLAMA_API_KEY`.

### 4. RAG Engine

- **Responsibility**: Message indexing, similarity search, prompt augmentation.
- **Storage**: SQLite (+ `sqlite-vec`).
- **Compute**: Moderate (vector arithmetic).
- **Interface**: `src/rag/mod.rs`.
- **Dependencies**: SQLite, `llama.cpp` (for embeddings), optional `EMBEDDING_API_KEY`.

### 5. Caching Layer (LruCache)

- **Responsibility**: Size-managed, thread-safe in-memory storage of recent Discord messages.
- **Efficiency**: Reduces SQLite/Discord API calls for frequently accessed data.
- **Interface**: `src/cache.rs`.
- **Dependencies**: `lru` crate.

### 6. Tool System

- **Responsibility**: Orchestrating function calls, managing built-in and external tools.
- **Interface**: `src/tools/`.
- **Dependencies**: `serde_json`.

### 7. MCP Manager

- **Responsibility**: Managing connections to external Model Context Protocol servers.
- **Interface**: `src/mcp/`.
- **Dependencies**: `rmcp`, `tokio`.

### 8. Context Manager (Three-Tier Memory)

- **Responsibility**: Orchestrating the bot's functional memory across three layers:
    - **Short-Term**: Last 50 verbatim messages (LruCache).
    - **Working Memory**: Condensed summaries of older conversations (Working Context).
    - **Long-Term Memory**: Indexed message history for tool-based retrieval (RAG).
- **Interface**: `src/context.rs`.
- **Dependencies**: `src/cache.rs`, `src/db/mod.rs`, `src/summarize.rs`.

### 9. Summarization Service

- **Responsibility**: Periodically condensing channel history into persistent summaries to maintain "Working Memory".
- **Compute**: Low (triggered every 4 hours, requires LLM call).
- **Interface**: `src/summarize.rs`.
- **Dependencies**: `src/llm/client.rs`, `src/db/mod.rs`.

### 10. Reply Handler

- **Responsibility**: Detecting and processing Discord message replies to the bot.
- **Interface**: `src/reply.rs`.
- **Dependencies**: `src/commands/chat.rs`, `src/llm/agent.rs`.

## Error Handling & Surfacing

- **Command errors**: Centralized Poise `on_error` handler logs full details and sends a user-facing error message.
- **Background tasks**: Errors are logged with context (no silent failures).
- **State locks**: Cache recovers from lock poisoning; database operations surface lock errors and add context.

## Configuration Management

Mascord uses a tiered configuration system:
1. **Source Code Constants**: Hardcoded defaults for ports (8080), models (local-model), and prompts.
2. **Environment Variables**: Overrides from the shell environment.
3. **.env File**: Local overrides for development/deployment convenience.

The `Config` struct in `src/config.rs` is responsible for merging these sources using `dotenvy` and `std::env`.

## Data Storage

### SQLite Database

- **Location**: `data/mascord.db`
- **Tables**:
  - `messages`: Standard message history (guild_id, channel_id, user_id, content, timestamp).
  - `channel_summaries`: Condensed Working Memory snapshots (channel_id, summary, updated_at).
  - `channel_settings`: Per-channel memory control (guild_id, channel_id, enabled, memory_start_date).
  - `settings`: Per-server configurations.

## Interfaces

```mermaid
graph LR
    User([User]) <--> Discord[Discord API]
    Discord <--> Framework[Framework - src/main.rs]

    subgraph Services
        Framework --> ChatCmd[/chat Command]
        ChatCmd --> Agent[Agent Loop]
        Framework --> ReplyHandler[Reply Handler - src/reply.rs]
        ReplyHandler --> Agent
        Framework --> Voice[Voice Service - src/voice/]
        Framework --> RAG[RAG Service - src/rag/]
        Framework --> Cache[Caching Layer - src/cache.rs]
        Framework --> Tools[Tool System - src/tools/]
        Framework --> MCP[MCP Manager - src/mcp/]
    end

    LLM <--> LlamaServer[llama.cpp Server]
    Voice --> YTDLP[yt-dlp]
    RAG <--> DB[(SQLite)]
    Cache <--> Discord
    Tools --> Builtin[Built-in Tools]
    MCP <--> MCPServers[External MCP Servers]
```

Commit message:

feat: Implement embedding indexing and confirmation for tool execution
- Added `EmbeddingIndexer` to process and index message embeddings in batches.
- Introduced `ToolConfirmationContext` and `confirm_tool_execution` for user confirmation on tool execution.
- Updated voice event handler to improve logging and code clarity.
- Created an implementation roadmap document outlining phases for memory and safety upgrades.
- Refactored music command to handle YouTube cookies more reliably and surface errors for age-restricted content.
- Enhanced summarization logic to maintain context over time with rolling summaries.

docs/ARCHITECTURE.md, after:

# Architecture: Mascord Discord Bot

## System Overview

Mascord is designed as a modular Discord bot focusing on local resource efficiency and clean separation of concerns.

## Components

### 1. Bot Framework (Poise/Serenity)

- **Responsibility**: Discord API interaction, gateway management, command dispatching.
- **Interface**: Uses `poise::Framework` for command routing. Unified `/chat` command for all interactions.
- **Dependencies**: Discord Gateway.

### 2. Audio Service (Songbird)

- **Responsibility**: Voice channel state management, audio streaming, queue handling.
- **Compute**: Low (audio decoding via Opus).
- **Interface**: `src/voice/player.rs`.
- **Dependencies**: `yt-dlp`, `ffmpeg`, optional `YOUTUBE_COOKIES`.

### 3. LLM Client (async-openai)

- **Responsibility**: Communicating with an LLM provider.
- **Support**: Works with *any* OpenAI-compatible API (e.g., `llama.cpp`, LocalAI, vLLM, Groq, or OpenAI).
- **Interface**: `src/llm/client.rs`.
- **Dependencies**: Configurable `LLAMA_URL` and optional `LLAMA_API_KEY`.

### 4. RAG Engine

- **Responsibility**: Message indexing, similarity search, prompt augmentation.
- **Storage**: SQLite with in-process Rust vector scoring (optional `sqlite-vec` acceleration).
- **Retrieval**: Hybrid merge of vector + keyword results with a light recency boost to prefer newer context.
- **Compute**: Moderate (vector arithmetic).
- **Interface**: `src/rag/mod.rs`.
- **Dependencies**: SQLite, `llama.cpp` (for embeddings), optional `EMBEDDING_API_KEY`.

### 5. Caching Layer (LruCache)

- **Responsibility**: Size-managed, thread-safe in-memory storage of recent Discord messages.
- **Efficiency**: Reduces SQLite/Discord API calls for frequently accessed data.
- **Interface**: `src/cache.rs`.
- **Dependencies**: `lru` crate.

### 6. Tool System

- **Responsibility**: Orchestrating function calls, managing built-in and external tools.
- **Interface**: `src/tools/`.
- **Dependencies**: `serde_json`.

### 7. MCP Manager

- **Responsibility**: Managing connections to external Model Context Protocol servers.
- **Interface**: `src/mcp/`.
- **Dependencies**: `rmcp`, `tokio`.

### 8. Context Manager (Three-Tier Memory)

- **Responsibility**: Orchestrating the bot's functional memory across three layers:
    - **Short-Term**: Last 50 verbatim messages (LruCache). Set `CONTEXT_RETENTION_HOURS=0` to disable the time filter and rely on the message limit only.
    - **Working Memory**: Condensed summaries of older conversations (Working Context).
    - **Long-Term Memory**: Indexed message history for tool-based retrieval (RAG).
- **Interface**: `src/context.rs`.
- **Dependencies**: `src/cache.rs`, `src/db/mod.rs`, `src/summarize.rs`.
- **Retention**: Long-term memory is retained via `LONG_TERM_RETENTION_DAYS` (separate from short-term `CONTEXT_RETENTION_HOURS`). Set to `0` to disable long-term cleanup.

### 9. Summarization Service

- **Responsibility**: Periodically condensing channel history into persistent summaries to maintain "Working Memory".
- **Compute**: Low (triggered every 4 hours, requires LLM call).
- **Interface**: `src/summarize.rs`.
- **Dependencies**: `src/llm/client.rs`, `src/db/mod.rs`.
- **Policy**: Rolling summary with hard size caps, periodic refresh, and milestone anchors extracted from summaries to prevent long-term drift.

### 10. Reply Handler

- **Responsibility**: Detecting and processing Discord message replies to the bot.
- **Interface**: `src/reply.rs`.
- **Dependencies**: `src/commands/chat.rs`, `src/llm/agent.rs`.

## Error Handling & Surfacing

- **Command errors**: Centralized Poise `on_error` handler logs full details and sends a user-facing error message.
- **Background tasks**: Errors are logged with context (no silent failures).
- **State locks**: Cache recovers from lock poisoning; database operations surface lock errors and add context.

## Configuration Management

Mascord uses a tiered configuration system:
1. **Source Code Constants**: Hardcoded defaults for ports (8080), models (local-model), and prompts.
2. **Environment Variables**: Overrides from the shell environment.
3. **.env File**: Local overrides for development/deployment convenience.

The `Config` struct in `src/config.rs` is responsible for merging these sources using `dotenvy` and `std::env`.

## Platform & Runtime Dependencies

- **Target platforms**: macOS and Linux. The codebase is OS-agnostic Rust with no platform-specific modules.
- **External binaries**: `yt-dlp` and `ffmpeg` must be installed and available on `PATH` for voice playback.
- **MCP servers**: Optional, but `npx`-based servers require Node.js on the host OS.

## Data Storage

### SQLite Database

- **Location**: `data/mascord.db`
- **Tables**:
  - `messages`: Standard message history (guild_id, channel_id, user_id, content, timestamp).
  - `channel_summaries`: Condensed Working Memory snapshots (channel_id, summary, updated_at).
  - `channel_settings`: Per-channel memory control (guild_id, channel_id, enabled, memory_start_date).
  - `settings`: Per-server configurations.

## Interfaces

```mermaid
graph LR
    User([User]) <--> Discord[Discord API]
    Discord <--> Framework[Framework - src/main.rs]

    subgraph Services
        Framework --> ChatCmd[/chat Command]
        ChatCmd --> Agent[Agent Loop]
        Framework --> ReplyHandler[Reply Handler - src/reply.rs]
        ReplyHandler --> Agent
        Framework --> Voice[Voice Service - src/voice/]
        Framework --> RAG[RAG Service - src/rag/]
        Framework --> Cache[Caching Layer - src/cache.rs]
        Framework --> Tools[Tool System - src/tools/]
        Framework --> MCP[MCP Manager - src/mcp/]
    end

    LLM <--> LlamaServer[llama.cpp Server]
    Voice --> YTDLP[yt-dlp]
    RAG <--> DB[(SQLite)]
    Cache <--> Discord
    Tools --> Builtin[Built-in Tools]
    MCP <--> MCPServers[External MCP Servers]
```
